Oracle Exadata docs (#45732)
gravitational/teleport: docs/pages/enroll-resources/database-access/enroll-self-hosted-databases/oracle-exadata.mdx

</Admonition>

### Update per-database configuration

Connect to the Oracle Exadata VM by logging in as the `opc` user and then switch to the `oracle` user:

```bash
$ ssh opc@<Var name="demodb-vm" />
$ sudo su - oracle
```

For each database-specific Oracle home, update the `$ORACLE_HOME/network/admin/sqlnet.ora` file with the following entries:

```
SSL_CLIENT_AUTHENTICATION = TRUE
SQLNET.AUTHENTICATION_SERVICES = (ALL)
```

For example, if there is a database named `spark`, the `oracle` user should have access to the automatically generated `/home/oracle/spark.env` file, which contains database-specific environment variables. After sourcing this file, the path `$ORACLE_HOME/network/admin/sqlnet.ora` will point to the `sqlnet.ora` file for the `spark` database and its associated Oracle home.

```code
# Load environment variables for the 'spark' database
$ . spark.env 

# Edit the configuration file at $ORACLE_HOME/network/admin/sqlnet.ora
...
```

Repeat these steps for each additional database or database home as required.

### Configure Oracle user account

Your Oracle user accounts must be configured to require a valid client certificate. 

```sql

> ALTER USER alice IDENTIFIED EXTERNALLY AS 'CN=alice';

Author: I've added tabs (new/existing user), and added a relevant warning for existing user.

# Copy the CA to the Oracle Exadata VM
$ scp teleport-db-client-ca.crt opc@<Var name="demodb-vm" />:/tmp/teleport-db-client-ca.crt
```

As the `grid` user, update the grid TCPS wallet to trust the Teleport User Database CA.

```code
# Read the wallet password
$ mkstore -wrl /u01/app/oracle/admin/cprops/cprops_wallet -nologo -viewEntry grid_tcps_wallet_passwd
grid_tcps_wallet_passwd = <wallet password>
# Update the grid TCPS wallet; provide the password when prompted
$ orapki wallet add -wallet "/var/opt/oracle/dbaas_acfs/grid/tcps_wallets" -trusted_cert -cert /tmp/teleport-db-client-ca.crt
```

### Enable TLS auth for grid listener

Adjust your grid listener configuration at `$ORACLE_HOME/network/admin/listener.ora` to enable TLS auth with the following entry:

```
SSL_CLIENT_AUTHENTICATION = TRUE
```

### Restart the listener

Once finished, restart the listener.

```code
$ lsnrctl stop
$ lsnrctl start
```

## Step 2/6. Collect database configuration data.

Export the built-in database certificate from Oracle. Teleport will use this certificate to verify the database connection.

```code
# Export the database certificate. Update the "-dn" parameter to match your actual setup.

> $ orapki wallet export -wallet "/var/opt/oracle/dbaas_acfs/grid/tcps_wallets" -dn "CN=<Var name="demodb-vm-scan.exadatadomain.oke.oraclevcn.com" />" -cert /tmp/oracle-server-certificate.crt

Author: You can probably just peek at the wallet with:

```
$ orapki wallet display -wallet "/var/opt/oracle/dbaas_acfs/grid/tcps_wallets"
```

But it would be good to test on a live server first, which we don't have right now.

On the host where you will run the Teleport Database Service, start Teleport
with the appropriate configuration.

Note that a single Teleport process can run multiple different services, for
example multiple Database Service agents as well as the SSH Service or Application
Service. The step below will overwrite an existing configuration file, so if
you're running multiple services add `--output=stdout` to print the config in
your terminal, and manually adjust `/etc/teleport.yaml`.

Copy the Oracle Database certificate and make it available at
   `/var/lib/teleport/oracle-server-certificate.crt` on the Teleport Database Service host.

Run the following command to generate a configuration file at
`/etc/teleport.yaml` for the Database Service. Update 
<Var name="example.teleport.sh" /> to use the host and port of the Teleport Proxy
Service:
```code
$ sudo teleport db configure create \
   -o file \
   --token=/tmp/token \
   --proxy=<Var name="example.teleport.sh:443" /> \
   --name="<Var name="oracle" />" \
   --protocol=oracle \
   --uri="<Var name="10.20.30.40:2484" />" \
   --ca-cert-file="/var/lib/teleport/oracle-server-certificate.crt" \

>    --labels=env=dev

Author: You are right, we don't even support it here. There is no relevant flag available nor is there a place in the template:
```
    tls:
      {{- if .DatabaseCACertFile }}
      ca_cert_file: "{{ .DatabaseCACertFile }}"
      {{- end }}
      {{- if .DatabaseTrustSystemCertPool }}
      trust_system_cert_pool: {{ .DatabaseTrustSystemCertPool }}
      {{- end }}
```

We should probably add this flag, but for the time being I'll add a note to set it manually.

>    --labels=env=dev

Author: Raised a feature request: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/45949

In order to enable this feature, you will need to configure Oracle Audit Trail and create a dedicated Teleport
user that will be used to fetch audit events from Oracle Audit Trail.

Create an internal Oracle `teleport` user that will fetch
audit events from Oracle Audit Trail:

```sql
CREATE USER teleport IDENTIFIED EXTERNALLY AS 'CN=teleport';
GRANT CREATE SESSION TO teleport;
GRANT SELECT ON dba_audit_trail TO teleport;
GRANT SELECT ON V_$SESSION TO teleport;
```

Enable the table in Oracle Audit Trail:
```sql
ALTER system SET audit_trail=db,extended scope=spfile;
```

Restart your Oracle instance to propagate audit trail changes.

Enable Oracle auditing for the `alice` user:
```sql
AUDIT ALL STATEMENTS by alice BY access;
```

You must enable auditing for each Teleport user that will be used to connect to Oracle.
Additionally you can create a different audit policy for each user.

Configure the Teleport Database Service to pull audit logs from Oracle Audit Trail:

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="Static config">
```yaml
db_service:
  enabled: "yes"
  databases:
  - name: <Var name="oracle" />
    protocol: "oracle"
    uri: "<Var name="10.20.30.40:2484" />"
    oracle:

>       audit_user: "teleport"

Author: Given that `tls.ca_cert_file: /var/lib/teleport/oracle-server-certificate.crt` is a reference to a local file, using a dynamic resource will be somewhat challenging here. I've dropped the `dynamic resource` tab to simplify the overall guide.

>       audit_user: "teleport"

Reviewer: > I've dropped the dynamic resource tab to simplify the overall guide.
sounds good. 

> Given that tls.ca_cert_file: /var/lib/teleport/oracle-server-certificate.crt is a reference to a local file, using a dynamic resource will be somewhat challenging here.

This is not true though, you put the content of the pem for `ca_cert` (which is defined by the db spec). file reference is a static config thing

>       audit_user: "teleport"

Author: Ah, you are right, somehow I have forgotten about this detail.

## Step 5/6. Create a Teleport user

(!docs/pages/includes/database-access/create-user.mdx!)

## Step 6/6. Connect

Once the Database Service has joined the cluster, log in to see the available
databases:

```code
$ tsh login --proxy=<Var name="example.teleport.sh" /> --user=alice
$ tsh db ls
# Name   Description    Allowed Users Labels  Connect
# ------ -------------- ------------- ------- -------
<Var name="oracle" />         [*]                   env=dev
```

Connect to the `"<Var name="oracle" />"` database. Pass the correct service name as the `--db-name` parameter.

You can check the service names by inspecting the database configuration on the Oracle Exadata VM.

```code
> lsnrctl services | grep paas
Service "spark_PDB1.paas.oracle.com" has 1 instance(s).
```

```code
$ tsh db connect --db-user alice --db-name spark_PDB1.paas.oracle.com <Var name="oracle" />
# SQLcl: Release 24.2 Production on Fri Aug 09 15:29:41 2024
# 
# Copyright (c) 1982, 2024, Oracle.  All rights reserved.
# 
# Connected to:
# Oracle Database 19c EE Extreme Perf Release 19.0.0.0.0 - Production
# Version 19.24.0.0.0
# 
# SQL> select user from dual;
# 
# USER     
# ________ 
# ALICE    
# 

> # SQL> select * from sys.employees;
> # 
> # NAME           AGE 
> # ___________ ______ 
> # John Doe        30 
> # Cat              5 
> # 
> # SQL> exit
> # Disconnected from Oracle Database 19c EE Extreme Perf Release 19.0.0.0.0 - # Production
> # Version 19.24.0.0.0

Reviewer: nit: 
```suggestion
# SQL>
```

---

> title: Database Access with Oracle Exadata

Author: I'll move it to cloud hosted section.

description: How to configure Teleport database access with Oracle Exadata.
---

(!docs/pages/includes/database-access/self-hosted-introduction.mdx dbType="Oracle Exadata"!)

## How it works

(!docs/pages/includes/database-access/how-it-works/mtls.mdx db="Oracle"!)

<Tabs>
<TabItem scope={["enterprise"]} label="Teleport Enterprise">
![Teleport Database Access Self-hosted Oracle](../../../../img/database-access/guides/oracle_selfhosted.png)
</TabItem>
<TabItem scope={["cloud"]} label="Teleport Enterprise Cloud">
![Teleport Database Access Oracle Cloud](../../../../img/database-access/guides/oracle_selfhosted_cloud.png)
</TabItem>

</Tabs>

## Prerequisites

(!docs/pages/includes/commercial-prereqs-tabs.mdx!)
- Oracle Exadata server instance 19c or later.
- The `sqlcl` [Oracle client](https://www.oracle.com/pl/database/sqldeveloper/technologies/sqlcl/) installed and added to your system's `PATH` environment variable or any GUI client that supports JDBC
  Oracle thin client.

> ## Step 1/6. Create a Teleport token and user

Reviewer 2: Can this step be moved after "Configure Oracle Exadata"? Otherwise the flow of the guide is switching between Teleport and database configuration. I don't think we're creating anything in this step that will be needed for the database setup.

Author: I didn't want to deviate from the pattern set by other guides, but I agree with you. Reorganising the steps will lead to less context switching in the guide.

Author: Reordered.

(!docs/pages/includes/tctl-token.mdx serviceName="Database" tokenType="db" tokenFile="/tmp/token"!)

> <Admonition type="tip">

Author: The doc now includes `docs/pages/includes/database-access/create-user.mdx`.

</Admonition>

Create a local Teleport user with the built-in `access` and `requester` roles:

```code
$ tctl users add \
  --roles=access,requester \
  --db-users=\* \
  --db-names=\* \
  alice
```

| Flag         | Description                                                                                                                              |
|--------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `--roles`    | List of roles to assign to the user. The builtin `access` role allows them to connect to any database server registered with Teleport.   |
| `--db-users` | List of database usernames the user will be allowed to use when connecting to the databases. A wildcard allows any user.                 |
| `--db-names` | List of logical databases (aka schemas) the user will be allowed to connect to within a database server. A wildcard allows any database. |

<Admonition type="warning">
  Database names are only enforced for PostgreSQL and MongoDB databases.

> </Admonition>

Author: I agree this is not applicable to Oracle, but database guides tend to just include `docs/pages/includes/database-access/create-user.mdx`, which has all these details.

For more detailed information about database access controls and how to restrict
access see [RBAC](../../database-access/rbac.mdx) documentation.

## Step 2/6. Configure Oracle Exadata

<Admonition type="note">

This guide assumes default configuration of the Oracle Exadata system. In particular:
- Preconfigured TCPS listener.
- An existing database certificate in the grid wallet.
- A single Oracle Exadata VM is accessible to the `opc` user through ssh with a hostname `demodb-vm`. Repeat the steps to configure additional VMs.
- The SCAN DNS name is `demodb-vm-scan.exadatadomain.oke.oraclevcn.com`

Adjust the commands to match your configuration.

</Admonition>

> Teleport uses mutual TLS authentication with self-hosted databases. These databases must be configured with Teleport's certificate authority to be able to verify client certificates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Teleport uses mutual TLS authentication with Exadata. It must be configured with Teleport's certificate authority to be able to verify client certificates.
```

> Login to Teleport on your machine.

Author: Done.

```code
$ tsh login --proxy=<Var name="example.teleport.sh" /> --user=alice

> ```

Author: Sounds good. I think we should update the other Oracle guide in a similar way.

> ```

Author: `tctl` is now in prerequisites.

Export the database client CA and copy it to target machine.

```code
# Export Teleport's database client certificate authority
$ tctl auth export --type=db-client > teleport-db-client-ca.crt
# Copy the CA to the Oracle Exadata VM
$ scp teleport-db-client-ca.crt opc@demodb-vm:/tmp/teleport-db-client-ca.crt
```

Login to the target machine and switch to `grid` user.

```code
# Connect to the VM
$ ssh opc@demodb-vm
# Switch to grid user
$ sudo su - grid
```

Update the TCPS wallet to trust the Teleport User Database CA.

```code
# Read the wallet password
$ mkstore -wrl /u01/app/oracle/admin/cprops/cprops_wallet -nologo -viewEntry grid_tcps_wallet_passwd
grid_tcps_wallet_passwd = <wallet password>
# Update the grid TCPS wallet; provide the password when prompted
$ orapki wallet add -wallet "/var/opt/oracle/dbaas_acfs/grid/tcps_wallets" -trusted_cert -cert /tmp/teleport-db-client-ca.crt
```

Enable TLS auth for grid listener by editing the configuration.

```code
# Edit listener.ora to read
# SSL_CLIENT_AUTHENTICATION = TRUE
$ vi $ORACLE_HOME/network/admin/listener.ora

> ...

Author: Fair enough, I used `vi` as we know it is generally available, but another editor may be in place instead.

> ...

Author: Done.

```

> For each database, update the configuration in the database home. Assuming a single database called `spark`:

Author: I meant another database on this particular server, but really this modification needs to be done per database home, which may be used by multiple databases. Sourcing env for particular database sets ORACLE_HOME, however, so you can edit `$ORACLE_HOME/network/admin/sqlnet.ora` afterwards.

> For each database, update the configuration in the database home. Assuming a single database called `spark`:

Author: Rephrased this section for clarity.

```code
# Switch to oracle user
$ sudo su - oracle
# Load env file for database 'spark'

> $ . spark.env 

Reviewer 2: I understand "spark" is just an example database you're using but it's not entirely clear whether this `.env` file is supposed to always exist and where?

Author: It is automatically created for each database. If you have ten databases, you will find ten different `.env` files in the home directory of Oracle user.

Author: I've rephrased this section to explain what is an example and what are expectations.

# Edit listener.ora to read
# SSL_CLIENT_AUTHENTICATION = TRUE
# SQLNET.AUTHENTICATION_SERVICES = (ALL)
$ vi $ORACLE_HOME/network/admin/sqlnet.ora
...
```

Repeat for additional databases as needed.

> Once finished, restart the listener using the `grid` user.

Author: I'll look into it, although I assumed switching is not very hard, being just a single `sudo su - <username>` away.

> Once finished, restart the listener using the `grid` user.

Author: Done. I still wish we could add some sort of context to the code blocks to incidate the user and machine (e.g. `grid@exadata-vm` or `oracle@exadata-vm` or `alice@workstation`), but I don't think our current doc engine allows for this.

```code
$ lsnrctl stop
$ lsnrctl start
```

Additionally, your Oracle Database user accounts must be configured to require a valid client certificate. If you're creating a new user:

```sql
CREATE USER alice IDENTIFIED EXTERNALLY AS 'CN=alice';
GRANT CREATE SESSION TO alice;

> ```

Reviewer: nit: not sure we want to mention container/service here since we are creating a local user (per container) instead of a common user.

> ## Step 3/6. Configure Teleport.

Reviewer: same comment as above, it would be nice if we can avoid switching and group similar commands run by same user together.

Author: Reordered.

> Export the database certificate from Oracle. Teleport will expect this certificate when connecting to the database.

Reviewer 2: Is this CA certificate or something else?

Author: Rephrased for clarity.

```code
# Connect to the VM
$ ssh opc@demodb-vm
# Switch to grid user
$ sudo su - grid
# Export the database certificate. Update the "-dn" parameter to match your actual setup.
$ orapki wallet export -wallet "/var/opt/oracle/dbaas_acfs/grid/tcps_wallets" -dn "CN=demodb-vm-scan.exadatadomain.oke.oraclevcn.com"  -cert /tmp/oracle-server-certificate.crt
```

> Save the `/tmp/oracle-server-certificate.crt` file to a suitable location. It will be used by the Database service when connectiong to the Oracle database. 

Reviewer 2: Same question as above essentially, I may be missing some implementation details of how Oracle auth works but this makes it sound like we're going to use this certificate for connecting to the database rather than as a CA to verify cert presented by the database.

Author: Agreed, now that you've pointed it out I can see how it can be read in a different way than the one I've intended. I'll rephrase.

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="Linux Server">

(!docs/pages/includes/install-linux-enterprise.mdx!)

On the host where you will run the Teleport Database Service, start Teleport
with the appropriate configuration.

Note that a single Teleport process can run multiple different services, for
example multiple Database Service agents as well as the SSH Service or Application
Service. The step below will overwrite an existing configuration file, so if
you're running multiple services add `--output=stdout` to print the config in
your terminal, and manually adjust `/etc/teleport.yaml`.

Copy the Oracle Database certificate and make it available at
   `/var/lib/teleport/oracle-server-certificate.crt` on the Teleport Database Service host.

Run the following command to generate a configuration file at
`/etc/teleport.yaml` for the Database Service. Update 
<Var name="example.teleport.sh" /> to use the host and port of the Teleport Proxy
Service:
```code
$ sudo teleport db configure create \
   -o file \
   --token=/tmp/token \
   --proxy=<Var name="example.teleport.sh:443" /> \
   --name="<Var name="oracle" />" \
   --protocol=oracle \
   --uri="<Var name="10.20.30.40:2484" />" \

>    --ca-cert-file="var/lib/teleport/oracle-server-certificate.crt" \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   --ca-cert-file="/var/lib/teleport/oracle-server-certificate.crt" \
```

   --labels=env=dev
```

The final entry for the `<Var name="oracle" />` database will look similar to this:

```yaml
db_service:
  enabled: true
  databases:
  - name: <Var name="oracle" />
    uri: "<Var name="10.20.30.40:2484" />"
    protocol: oracle
    tls:
      mode: verify-ca

>       ca_cert_file: /var/lib/teleport/oracle-server-certificate.crt

Reviewer 2: So this is CA certificate - then per my comments above I would rephrase in a couple of places to make this more explicit.

      ca_cert_file: /etc/teleport-tls-db/db-ca/ca.pem
extraVolumes:
  - name: db-ca
    secret:
      secretName: db-ca
extraVolumeMounts:
  - name: db-ca
    mountPath: /etc/teleport-tls-db/db-ca
    readOnly: true
```

Teleport provides Helm charts for installing the Teleport Database Service in Kubernetes Clusters.

(!docs/pages/includes/kubernetes-access/helm/helm-repo-add.mdx!)

Install the chart:

   ```code
   $ helm install teleport-kube-agent teleport/teleport-kube-agent \
     --create-namespace \
     --namespace teleport-agent \
     --version (=teleport.version=) \
     -f values.yaml
   ```

Make sure that the Teleport agent pod is running. You should see one
`teleport-kube-agent` pod with a single ready container:

   ```code
   $ kubectl -n teleport-agent get pods
   NAME                    READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
   teleport-kube-agent-0   1/1     Running   0          32s
   ```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Step 5/6. (Optional) Configure Teleport to pull audit logs from Oracle Audit Trail

Teleport can pull audit logs from Oracle Audit Trail.
In order to enable this feature, you will need to configure Oracle Audit Trail and create a dedicated Teleport

> user that will be used to fetch audit events from Oracle Audit Trail.

Reviewer: create new include and share between the oracle guides?

Author: Not sure if its worth it at this moment? We only have two guides, and this section doesn't match 1-1 with the other one as the variables are different here, as we are using IP addresses in this one.

Author: I'm leaving it as it is for now.
